Welcome to Slash Forward. Imagine, if you
will, that you lost some family members
due to a terrible tragedy, but that their remains
were never recovered. Through extensive searching
at your own personal cost you not only locate
them, but find that despite being children alone
in the woods, they are still alive. Do you think
you would have what it takes to nurture and raise
them through their recovery and subsequent
development? If so, would you still feel as
confident if they had taken on the mannerisms of
a feral ghost woman and forgone all social norms?
Today we’re going to learn how to do just that
through the training vehicle that is the 2013 film
Mama. It was produced by Guillermo
Del Toro, but actually directed by
Andy Muschietti whose story intertwines folklore
with a story grounded in reality. Do you think
he lived up to Guillermo’s expectations? Let
me know what you thought in the comments below
and if you enjoy the video, hitting the like
button would help me out a lot. Let’s get to it.
We open on radio exposition describing a
market crash pursuant to an office shooting
at a holding company where one of the senior
partners, Jeff Desange, went missing. We then
find Victoria and Lilly waiting patiently as
footsteps pound down the hall. Their father
Jeff bursts in and rushes them out of the house,
sans mommy. They’re going nowhere in particular,
but Jeff really wants to get there fast,
leading to an inevitable loss of control.
Back at the house we find his brother Lucas and
the police a few steps behind in the confusion,
and the picture comes into resolution as the radio
now confirms that Jeff Desange was the shooter,
and that the target of his ire was his
estranged wife who is confirmed dead.
Now fleeing on foot they find reprieve in
an abandoned cabin that was named after a
font - oh, uh, partially abandoned. Jeff starts a
fire to help the girls settle into their new life
in the country, and then goes to engage in his
midafternoon meltdown. This is interrupted when
Victoria sees a woman outside who’s not on the
ground. He doesn’t hear this, however, because
he’s consumed with exploring ways to assuage his
guilt. He settles on keeping the girls from harm
by mortally harming them, but is diverted by a
dark entity. In the night, as they wait patiently
and wonder how they will survive, they’re provided
a single cherry. That should tide them over.
Flash forward five years to Lucas in his apartment
coordinating an ongoing search effort for his
brother’s remains. When his girlfriend Annabel
comes out to join him, they discuss the fact
that the hired searchers’ last paycheck bounced
because Lucas has spent all his money searching
for dear Jeff. Not realizing, of course, that
he attempted to kill his own children. Luckily,
since they’re already out there, he’s still
got the boys on the hook for now. Even more
lucky - when Ron goes to take a leak, he
rolls a Yahtzee in the form of Jeff’s Benz.
He and Burnsie head deeper into the wilderness
and find the abandoned cabin, entering cautiously.
There is clear evidence inside of the presence of
children at some point, due to the wall drawings,
thousands of cherry pits and, of course,
the two feral children who confront them.
The successful rescue is considered generally
good, except it really cramps Annabel’s rock and
roll lifestyle. Regardless, she supports Lucas
as he visits Dr. Dreyfuss, who warns that while
Victoria is showing signs of recovery, Lilly may
have been too young to be normalized for polite
society. Lucas goes in delicately and finds the
girls to be very quick and agile, and he tries to
win over Victoria with a new pair of specs like
a proper English lass. They form a bond as he
is the spitting image of Jeff and, of course, she
doesn’t know that daddy had intended to kill her.
Ninety days later Dr. Dreyfuss gives a positive
report as they’re making good progress.
He explains that they survived by creating an
imaginary guardian they call mama who cared
for them and fed them cherries. He recommends a
transplant into a loving home. But we also learn
this hearing is a debate with their maternal
aunt Jean vying for custody of the girls.
Dr. Dreyfuss does wonder whether Lucas and
Annabel are serious enough about parenthood
to convert to a sufficiently clean lifestyle
to care for the girls. But on the other hand,
Jean lives on the other side of the country,
and the Dr. wants to keep the girls close so
he can leach off that clout. Buuuut, if they
agree to stay in a house the uni keeps for
research purposes and provide him unlimited
access, they can win his recommendation. And
soon they’re reassuring Jean that they
intend to honor her visitation rights.
Dreyfuss starts right in with the
questioning. Victoria claims Mama
showed her in a dream how a woman
escaped from a psychiatric hospital,
fleeing into the wilderness with
her baby before jumping off a cliff.
After Annabel breaks up with her band,
putting her musical aspirations behind her,
they all converge on their new home.
Annabel seems eager to set some clear rules
oh, thanks. And then they go to the backyard,
which has been outfitted with some sweet boxes and
a dachshund. Then they enjoy a simple dinner, each
in their own way, before turning in for the night.
Soon thereafter Dr. Dreyfuss goes to research
some medical records and see if he can find
evidence of a patient like the one
Victoria described. Luckily he runs
across a very helpful clerk who points him
to the 19th century case of Edith Brennan.
Just so we all know the situation, we’re
brought back to the house where the girls
engage in some crafts and synchronized
humming. Then, when putting away laundry
Annabel nearly walks in on a game of tug of
war that involves Lilly and not Victoria.
Later on, during a jam sesh, there’s an electrical
disturbance accompanied by some strange noises.
It may have just been Lilly acting like a little
freak, but Annabel is left shaking like a leaf.
Although, it’s really nothing that a
little smoochin’ can’t cure, I’m sure.
But a figure in the mirror takes her out
of the mood. Lucas goes to investigate,
but finds the girls fast asleep.
Insistent that she didn’t imagine it,
she sends him off to check downstairs. Along the
way he finds a strange, creeping fungus expanding
across the wall. The inky darkness eventually
gives birth to a moth before something else
instigates an involuntary moonsault over the top
rope into a bellybuster across the staircase.
Despite taking a good bump, he winds up
in the ICU in a hopefully temporary coma.
Then Dr. Dreyfuss casually strolls in to
nonchalantly make it seem like it would be
only natural for Annabel to
take over care of the girls.
At home, again, we have no signs of entry or
theft, which means the police are powerless
to do anything. So she settles into
bed and promptly has a nightmare.
Lilly’s there, natch, but she’s snapped
awake by strange moanings in the dark.
The next day we learn that the girls are coping
with this tragedy by talking to the walls and
making elaborate crafts. Jogging a memory,
Dreyfuss goes back to his earlier tapes where
there was a similar doll that the girls claimed
was made by mama. He also notes that Victoria has
an unnerving way of looking past his shoulder
toward the ceiling. He then gets a voicemail
from the friendly clerk at public records to
let him know that she made a new discovery.
At the house, they’re all having a pretty chill
evening, even though Annabel gets suspicious that
they’re goofin on her. Then everyone goes
to bed, but mama almost immediately comes
out of the closet for gametime. The girls
start up their synchronized humming again,
which wakes Annabel, and she is disturbed
when they’re joined by an unexpected bass.
She whips the door open and shames the girls
for having a good time. Unable to shake the
feeling that there was someone else with
them, she approaches the closet. However,
when Victoria pleads with her not to
open it, she respects their privacy.
She visits with the Dr. to discuss her
concern that someone is coming to visit
them in the night. He plays some video of their
humming to confirm if it’s the same song. It is,
but she insists it was tuned to a much lower
register. This leads the Dr. to suggest
dissociative personality disorder - he believes
Victoria is mama as a means of coping. Seeing that
Annabel is disturbed by this, he reassures her
that it’s a treatable condition and that she’s
safe. I mean, what can a nine year old with a
knife do to an adult while she’s sleeping anyway?
Later at the archives, the Dr.
is guided to another file she
found regarding the Edith Brennan matter - it’s
box of physical remains, so that’s cool. Then,
she educates ya boi on the secrets of the
occult She is such a tremendous help here,
and she suggests there is some sort
of wrong that needs to be righted.
Back with the girls, Lilly is still popping
out of boxes and making weird noises,
and Annabel gets a whiff of mama. And then at
the hospital we are shocked to discover that,
despite her age, mama is a straight up
hacker. She helps Lucas by giving him
a vision that directs him toward the cabin,
followed by a grand mal seizure. Hey, thanks!
The family visits now that Lucas is awake, and
they all share their longings of reuniting.
The visit is spent sharing pictures and
nibbling on nearby moths. But at home,
Victoria has become morose. She’s softening
toward Annabel and doesn’t want her to get
hurt due to mama’s jealous streak. Then Jean
arrives, because she gets the girls on Thursdays.
Understanding that Annabel is not a natural mother
figure, she tries to leverage this by enticing
her to let her have the girls for a few days so
she can go rock out and do some drugs. Instead,
Annabel runs her off, but only after ruling
her out as a suspect in the mystery of the
baritone hummer. Of course, Jean’s a bitch,
so she goes straight to her car to call CPS.
Annabel tries to loop Lucas in on these events
so he’s in the know, and he lets slip that the
girls are the most important thing to
him, complicating their relationship.
Sometime later Victoria has another hypnosis
session where the Dr. gets right into asking
about mama. He’s told she lives in the walls, but
doesn’t get much more than that. He insists on
trying to ascertain her true identity, leading to
an emotional outburst and another wall apparition.
He tries to mask his fear and scoot out of there
like nothing’s wrong, but he knows he’s on to
something big. Through narration of his session
notes, we learn he believes he’s found some sort
of doorway and intends to acquire the evidence
needed to prove this extraordinary discovery.
That evening mama decides to show Annabel some
scenes relating to the circumstances surrounding
her flight from the hospital, pursuit through
the woods and escape at all costs mentality.
This pushes her into another dream in which she
becomes mama’s small spoon before she fully wakes
up. Meanwhile, in the girls’ room, Lilly wants
Victoria to come with her and mama, but she
chooses to stay behind. As a result, Lilly escapes
too late and finds mama has already left the area.
Because, concurrently, Dr. Dreyfuss has
arrived at the cabin, at night of course,
and mama has some haunting to do. He
finds the gateway and calls out to mama,
hoping to open a dialogue with her. He
claims to be able to provide what she needs,
but soon learns that she’s not
really interested in all that.
The next morning, Annabel wakes up and discovers
Lilly shivering in the bushes. Maternal instincts
kick in and she rushes her inside to try to warm
her up with some jiu-jitsu. After a struggle,
the warm touch of a corporeal mommy
finally breaks through her feral ways.
But, that’s not good in
terms of the jealousy issue.
Victoria then whips up a quick spaghetti breakfast
as Annabel tells Lilly to head downstairs.
But then a devastating revelation. She
peers into the closet and finds the doorway,
but is interrupted before finding more.
Her first instinct is to consult with
Dr. Dreyfuss, but she can’t seem to
reach him. So she drives to his office
and finds his assistant to be somewhat
frazzled by his disappearance. Taking
advantage of the lack of supervision,
she hops into his office and swipes his
box of records. As she’s doing that,
Lucas starts feeling an intense itch to get
his ass over to Clifton Forge, which he does.
Once they get back to the house, we see that
the box had the doctor’s whole damn laptop.
It reveals his thirst for fame and fortune as
she finds a draft of the book about mama that
he’s working on. She also finds a recording of
the therapy session explaining mama’s origins,
which matches her dream. In this expanded version,
we learn that mama and the baby were separated on
the way down, and she had been wandering the woods
looking for her until she happened upon the girls
who assuaged her sadness. The human remains
that were filed away are actually of the baby.
A little later, Victoria attempts to comfort
Annabel and tells her that she loves her.
While outside mean Jean rolls up looking to get
some sweet evidence she can turn over to CPS.
Upstairs the girls are playing when they hear
something. They go downstairs and find mama,
but Victoria recognizes that she’s mad, which
sends them scurrying. Hearing the ruckus Annabel
comes to check on them, but her appearance
only exacerbates the rage. So mama chases
her down and tackles her. The girls are like:
Moooom, stop suckin on backs, it’s embarrassing!
Their empathy gives her pause, and Jean’s
presence downstairs distracts her fully.
Jean is shocked to find immediate evidence
of substandard housekeeping. Victoria arrives
at the kitchen and finds aunt Jean twerkin’
like crazy, apparently now a vessel for mama.
When Annabel wakes up, the girls are gone.
Thinking quickly she grabs the remains and
heads to Clifton Forge. She calls Lucas
along the way, but can’t reach him,
but then he shows up in the road and then
they find the cabin. Inside is Jean’s husk,
but no sign of the others. They head out back
and find their way to the cliff where the
ladies are just hanging out. In an attempt
to extricate the girls from her custody,
Annabel distracts mama with her
actual child’s desiccated remains.
This rejuvenates her to a significant degree,
until Lilly snaps her back into reality. To
reclaim her prize she gives Lucas’s heart a
little squeeze and tosses Annabel aside like
a sack of potatoes. Unwilling to let go, the two
factions tentatively arrive at a split agreement
through which mama will retain custody of Lilly
and Victoria will remain with the living. Mama
and Lilly then recreate that fateful event and,
upon impact, turn into some moths, so that’s cool.
Ultimately, it is very sad but also, it’s not
like Lilly really fit in very well anyway.
Wow, did we just watch the same movie two weeks
in a row? And they were both released in 2013!
Not to imply that they were copies or anything,
but just to say it’s interesting how strongly
implanted some of these tropes are in our
collective storytelling minds. You can
basically take the same framework and repackage
it, and it hits in a completely different way.
I did enjoy Mama more than Dark Skies. I
think it had more mood and style throughout,
and a slightly more concrete set of rules to
help carry us through the story. Obviously,
being so similar, both films fall short
in some of the same ways. So, rather than
reiterate everything I said about Dark Skies,
I’m going to try to expand on my prior critiques.
I think movies like this run a risk in becoming
preoccupied with the general concept of the film.
When I said the movie feels like lots of little
things happening, I meant that it felt as though
the filmmakers came up with what they thought
would be a really interesting and creepy premise.
Thinking about how the premise could be used, they
then came up with a series of different scenes or
events that could illustrate how the danger being
presented works in the cinematic universe. Then,
they have to develop some sort of story to
stretch around it, hoping to pull everything
together while keeping the audience’s suspension
of disbelief within reasonable boundaries. The
end result can feel somewhat disjointed and
is typically identified by movies having a
strong start, somewhat muddled middle and often
confusing or dissatisfying endings. Although,
to the credit of this particular
movie, it was at least interesting.
Recent films like The Woman in the Window and
Things Seen and Heard suffer the same weaknesses,
but are also kind of boring. Mama and Dark
Skies, on the other hand, are worth the time.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you can
support the channel through donations or
merch. Any donation unlocks uncensored movie
reviews of Lifeforce and Under the Skin,
with others to be added over
time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.